Hedge Funds
Hedge funds are alternative investments using pooled funds that employ numerous different strategies to earn active return, or alpha, for their investors. Hedge funds may be aggressively managed or make use of derivatives and leverage in both domestic and international markets with the goal of generating high returns (either in an absolute sense or over a specified market benchmark). It is important to note that hedge funds are generally only accessible to accredited investors as they require less SEC regulations than other funds.
Stock Management
Stock management is the function of understanding the stock mix of a company and the different demands on that stock. The demands are influenced by both external and internal factors and are balanced by the creation of purchase order requests to keep supplies at a reasonable or prescribed level. Stock management is important for every other business enterprise.
Asset Allocation
Asset allocation is an investment strategy that aims to balance risk and reward by apportioning a portfolio's assets according to an individual's goals, risk tolerance and investment horizon. The three main asset classes - equities, fixed-income, and cash and equivalents - have different levels of risk and return, so each will behave differently over time.
Cryptocurrency
A cryptocurrency (or crypto currency) is digital asset designed to work as a medium of exchange that uses strong cryptography to secure financial transactions, control the creation of additional units, and verify the transfer of assets. Cryptocurrency is a kind of digital currency, virtual currency or alternative currency. Cryptocurrencies use decentralized control as opposed to centralized electronic money and central banking systems. The decentralized control of each cryptocurrency works through distributed ledger technology, typically a blockchain, that serves as a public financial transaction database.
Swap Positioning
A practice whereby an intermediary enters into one side of the swap transaction, such as fixed rate payer (or floating rate payer) to a client who wishes to be a floating rate payer (or a fixed rate payer). Then the intermediary waits for a matching counterparty and offloads the swap thereto. In other words, swap positioning involves holding a portfolio of swaps usually by a swap dealer without seeking to offset each swap with an identical mirror swap.
Fully Drawn Advance
Fully drawn advance is a financing method which gives you the freedom to take funds or a loan but only for longer durations. It is an ideal way of financing assets which have a long shelf life such as real estate or a manufacturing plant and equipment, etc.
Debt Consolidation
Debt consolidation means combining more than one debt obligation into a new loan with a favourable term structure such as lower interest rate structure, tenure, etc. Here, the amount received from the new loan is used to pay off other debts.
Balloon Payment
Balloon payment is the lump sum payment which is attached to a loan, mortgage, or a commercial loan. This payment is usually made towards the end of the loan period. Balloon payment is higher than what you might be paying towards the loan on a monthly basis.
Capital Lease
Capital lease is a lease agreement in which the lessor agrees to transfer the ownership rights to the lessee after the completion of the lease period. Capital or finance leases are long term and non cancellable in nature.
REITS
REIT or Real Estate Investment Trust refers to an entity created with the sole purpose of channelling investible funds into operating, owning or financing income-producing real estate. REITs are modelled on the lines of mutual funds and provide investors with an extremely liquid way to get a stake in real estate. It is a type of security that provides all types of investors, big or small, an outlet for regular income, portfolio diversification, and long-term capital appreciation. Like any other security, REITs can enlist themselves on a stock exchange.
Lumpsum
A lump sum amount is defined as a single complete sum of money. A lump sum investment is of the entire amount at one go.
Cost Push Inflation
Cost push inflation is inflation caused by an increase in prices of inputs like labour, raw material, etc. The increased price of the factors of production leads to a decreased supply of these goods. While the demand remains constant, the prices of commodities increase causing a rise in the overall price level. This is in essence cost push inflation.
