Allery and Immunology
An Allergist-Immunologist diagnoses and manages disorders involving immune system conditions such as asthma, anaphylaxis, rhinitis and eczema as well as adverse reactions to drugs, foods and insect stings; also immune deficiency diseases and problems related to autoimmune disease, organ transplantation or malignancies of the immune system.
Anesthesiology
An Anesthesiologist is a physician who provides anesthesia for patients undergoing surgical, obstetric, diagnostic or therapeutic procedures while monitoring the patient's condition and supporting vital organ functions. The Anesthesiologist also diagnoses and treats acute, chronic and/or cancer pain as well as provides resuscitation and medical management for patients with critical illnesses and severe injuries.
Colon and Rectal Surgery
A Colon and Rectal Surgeon diagnoses and treats various diseases of the small intestine, colon, rectum, anal canal and perianal area including the organs and tissues related with primary intestinal diseases (liver, urinary and female reproductive system). They treat conditions such as hemorrhoids, fissures (painful tears in the anal lining), abscesses and fistulaes (infections located around the anus and rectum). They also diagnose and treat problems of the intestine and colon such as cancer, polyps (precancerous growths) and inflammatory conditions.
Dermatology
A Dermatologist is a physician with training and expertise in the diagnosis and medical/surgical management of diseases of the skin, hair and nails, and mucous membranes.
Emergency Medicine
A physician who specializes in Emergency Medicine focuses on the immediate decision making and action necessary to prevent death or any further disability both in the pre-hospital setting by directing emergency medical technicians and in the emergency department. This specialist provides immediate recognition, evaluation, care, stabilization and disposition of a generally diversified population of adult and pediatric patients in response to acute illness and injury.
Family Medicine
Family physicians deliver a range of acute, chronic and preventive medical care services. In addition to diagnosing and treating illness, they also provide preventive care, including routine checkups, health-risk assessments, immunization and screening tests, and personalized counseling on maintaining a healthy lifestyle. Family physicians also manage chronic illness, often coordinating care provided by other subspecialists.
Internal Medicine
An Internist is a personal physician who provides long-term, comprehensive care in the office and in the hospital, managing both common and complex illnesses of adolescents, adults and the elderly. Internists are trained in the diagnosis and treatment of cancer, infections and diseases affecting the heart, blood, kidneys, joints and the digestive, respiratory and vascular systems. They are also trained in the essentials of primary care internal medicine, which incorporates an understanding of disease prevention, wellness, substance abuse, mental health and effective treatment of common problems of the eyes, ears, skin, nervous system and reproductive organs.
Genetics and Genomics
Medical Geneticists specialize in medicine that involves the interaction between genes and health.  They are trained to evaluate, diagnose, manage, treat and counsel individuals of all ages with hereditary disorders. This specialist uses modern cytogenetic, molecular, genomic and biochemical genetic testing to assist in specialized diagnostic evaluations, implement needed therapeutic interventions and provide genetic counseling and prevention through prenatal and preimplantation diagnosis.  The Medical Geneticist plans and coordinates screening for genetic diseases involving single gene and chromosomal disorders, congenital anomalies, inborn errors of metabolism, multifactorial conditions, and common disorders with hereditary factors. 
Neurological Surgery
Neurological Surgery constitutes a medical discipline and surgical specialty that provides care for adult and pediatric patients in the treatment of pain or pathological processes that may modify the function or activity of the central nervous system (e.g., brain, hypophysis, and spinal cord), the peripheral nervous system (e.g., cranial, spinal, and peripheral nerves), the autonomic nervous system, the supporting structures of these systems (e.g., meninges, skull & skull base, and vertebral column), and their vascular supply (e.g., intracranial, extracranial, and spinal vasculature).
Nuclear Medicine
A Nuclear Medicine specialist uses molecular tracers (usually labeled with radioactive atoms) for diagnosis and therapy. These labeled tracers are most often used  to produce images that provide information about organ function, as well as cellular function on a molecular level (molecular imaging). Molecular imaging can be combined with anatomical imaging by using specialized cameras. The most common diagnostic applications of Nuclear Medicine include the early detection of coronary artery disease, cancer diagnosis and staging and the evaluation of the effect of cancer treatment. The fusion of molecular and anatomical information increases diagnostic accuracy and changes medical management. Radioactive materials are also used to treat a variety of health problems, including thyroid disorders and cancer.
Obstetrics and Gynecology
An Obstetrician/Gynecologist focuses on the health of women before, during and after childbearing years, diagnosing and treating conditions of the reproductive system and associated disorders.
Ophthamology
Ophthalmology is a specialty focused on the medical and surgical care of the eyes. Ophthalmologists are the only physicians medically trained to manage the complete range of the eye and vision care. They can prescribe glasses and contact lenses, dispense medications, diagnose and treat eye conditions and diseases and perform surgeries.
Orthopaedic Surgery
An Orthopaedic Surgeon is educated in the preservation, investigation and restoration of the form and function of the extremities, spine and associated structures by medical, surgical and physical means. This specialist is involved with the care of patients whose musculoskeletal problems include congenital deformities, trauma, infections, tumors, metabolic disturbances of the musculoskeletal system, deformities, injuries and degenerative diseases of the spine, hands, feet, knee, hip, shoulder and elbow in children and adults. An Orthopaedic Surgeon is also concerned with primary and secondary muscular problems and the effects of central or peripheral nervous system lesions of the musculoskeletal system.
Otolaryngology
An Otolaryngologist - Head and Neck Surgeon provides medical and/or surgical therapy or prevention of diseases, allergies, neoplasms, deformities, disorders and/or injuries of the ears, nose, sinuses, throat, respiratory and upper alimentary systems, face, jaws and the other head and neck systems. Head and neck oncology, facial plastic and reconstructive surgery and the treatment of disorders of hearing and voice are fundamental areas of expertise.
Pathology
A Pathologist deals with the causes and nature of disease and contributes to diagnosis, prognosis and treatment through knowledge gained by the laboratory application of the biologic, chemical and physical sciences. This specialist uses information gathered from the microscopic examination of tissue specimens, cells and body fluids, and from clinical laboratory tests on body fluids and secretions for the diagnosis, exclusion and monitoring of disease.
Pediatrics
Pediatricians practice the specialty of medical science concerned with the physical, emotional, and social health of children from birth to young adulthood. Pediatric care encompasses a broad spectrum of health services ranging from preventive health care to the diagnosis and treatment of acute and chronic diseases. Pediatricians understand the many factors that affect the growth and development of children. They understand that children are not simply small adults. Children change rapidly, and they must be approached with an appreciation for their stage of physical and mental development.
Physical Medicine
A specialist in Physical Medicine and Rehabilitation, also called a Physiatrist, evaluates and treats patients with physical and/or cognitive impairments and disabilities that result from musculoskeletal conditions (such as neck or back pain, sports or work injuries), neurological conditions (such as stroke, brain injury, or spinal cord injury), or other medical conditions. Physiatrists have expertise in therapeutic exercise, medications, and injections for management of pain and spasticity; electrodiagnosis; prostheses (artificial limbs); orthoses (braces); and other equipment to assist daily activities, and coordinate treatment to help patients improve their physical, psychological, social, and vocational function.
Plastic Surgery
A Plastic Surgeon deals with the repair, reconstruction or replacement of physical defects of form or function involving the skin, musculoskeletal system, craniomaxillofacial structures, hand, extremities, breast and trunk and external genitalia or cosmetic enhancement of these areas of the body. Cosmetic surgery is an essential component of plastic surgery. The Plastic Surgeon uses cosmetic surgical principles to both improve overall appearance and to optimize the outcome of reconstructive procedures.
Preventive Medicine
A Preventive Medicine specialist focuses on the health of individuals and defined populations in order to protect, promote and maintain health and well-being, and to prevent disease, disability and premature death. They may be a specialist in General Preventive Medicine, Public Health, Occupational Medicine or Aerospace Medicine. 
Psychiatry
A Psychiatrist specializes in the evaluation and treatment of mental, addictive and emotional disorders such as schizophrenia and other psychotic disorders, mood disorders, anxiety disorders, substance-related disorders, sexual and gender identity disorders and adjustment disorders.
Radiology
A Radiologist is a physician who uses imaging methodologies to diagnose and manage patients and provide therapeutic options. Physicians practicing in the field of Radiology specialize in Diagnostic Radiology, Interventional Radiology, or Radiation Oncology. They also may certify in a number of subspecialties (descriptions follow). The board also certifies in Medical Physics and issues specific certificates within this discipline.
Surgery
A General Surgeon has principal expertise in the diagnosis and care of patients with diseases and disorders affecting the abdomen, digestive tract, endocrine system, breast, skin and blood vessels. A General Surgeon is also trained in the treatment of patients who are injured or critically ill, and in the care of pediatric and cancer patients. General Surgeons are skilled in the use of minimally invasive techniques and endoscopies. Common conditions treated by General Surgeons include hernias, gallstones, appendicitis, breast tumors, thyroid disorders, pancreatitis, bowel obstructions, colon inflammation, and colon cancer. Some General Surgeons pursue additional training and specialize in the fields of Pediatric Surgery, Surgical Oncology, Vascular Surgery, Trauma Surgery, Hospice and Palliative Medicine, Transplant Surgery, and others.
Thoracic Surgery
Thoracic Surgery encompasses the operative, perioperative, and surgical critical care of patients with acquired and congenital pathologic conditions within the chest. Thoracic Surgeons treat diseased or injured organs in the chest, including the esophagus (muscular tube that passes food to the stomach), trachea (windpipe), pleura (membranes that cover and protect the lung), mediastinum (area separating the left and right lungs that contains the heart), chest wall, diaphragm (separates the chest from the abdomen), pericardium (membrane covering the heart), heart (including the pericardium, coronary arteries, valves and myocardium) and lungs. The most common diseases requiring thoracic surgery include heart lesions, such as coronary artery disease and valve problems, lung cancer, chest trauma, esophageal cancer, emphysema, and heart and lung transplantation.
Urology
A Urologist, also known as a Genitourinary Surgeon, focuses on diagnosing and treating disorders of the urinary tracts of males and females, and on the reproductive system of males. This specialist manages non-surgical problems such as urinary tract infections and benign prostatic hyperplasia, as well as surgical problems such as the surgical management of cancers, the correction of congenital abnormalities, and correcting stress incontinence.